*****************************************************
* How to flash/update the Freifunk-Open-MPP-Tracker *
*****************************************************

Whenever you power up the Freifunk-Open-MPP-Tracker, it will wait 15 seconds
for the upload of a new firmware via the serial port.  So you can flash the
Freifunk-Open-MPPT without a dedicated programmer :)

All you need is a 3.3 Volt level compatible serial port. Serial ports are
now a legacy on Laptops and PCs, but there are cheap USB-serial-adapters
available.  You will also need a serial port level shifter that is
compatible with 3.3 Volt levels. You can get both from your hacker-friendly
electronics store.

Don't connect the Freifunk-Open-MPPT directly to a standard PC serial port
or USB-to-serial dongle without a level shifter in between, as standard
RS-232 ports use way higher voltages than 3.3 Volt. A standard-level serial
port will certainly destroy the Atmega8!

If you are in the middle of nowhere and you can't get your hands on a serial
port and/or level shifter, take a look at the bottom of this text.  There is
a solution ;)


Step one:
*********

Power off the MPPT: Disconnect it from solar panel and battery.

Connect the 3.3 Volt compatible serial port to the 2 x 5 pin header with
jumper cable.

	MOSI Pin_1 * | * Pin_2  MISO
	SCLK Pin_3 * | * Pin_4  3.3V
	  TX Pin_5 * | * Pin_6  GND
	  RX Pin_7 * | * Pin_8  GND
	 RST Pin_9 * | * Pin_10 GND


Pin #1 is the pin next to the crystal. You have to make 4 connections:

	3.3 V -- 3.3 V
	   TX -- RX
	   RX -- TX
	  GND -- GND

Step two:
*********

Actually, we can flash the firmware with just the 'cat' command that every
Unix-like operating systems has.  However, we need to configure the serial
port of our PC/Laptop with the following settings beforehand:

9600 baud
8-N-1
Software flow control (Xon/Xoff) enabled

I use the program 'minicom' to set the serial parameters of the serial port
(Linux) via the 'minicom' menu.  Then I stop minicom without resetting the
serial port (minicom will ask if it should do that before it stops, just
choose 'no')

You can also use 'putty' or any other terminal software to set up the serial
port and upload the firmware file.

Step three:
***********

Go to the directory with the new firmware. By default, the firmware is the
file 'main.hex'.  If you want to flash via a terminal software, select
main.hex for upload.  The transfer protocol is ASCII. 

As an alternative, type the command 

cat main.hex > /dev/ttyUSB0

on the command line, but don't press 'Return' yet.

ttyUSB0 is the first USB to serial port in the system. If you use a
different port, change /dev/tty-something accordingly.

Step four:
**********

Power on the Freifunk-Open-MPPT by connecting it to the battery. Start the
file-upload within 15 seconds after connecting the power.

Wait until the upload is finished. Let another few seconds pass. Power-cycle
the Freifunk-Open-MPPT again.

If the communication with the device doesn't work, you might have confused
TX and RX lines. Swap the lines and try again.

Congratulations, you have just flashed a new firmware to the device!

#################################################
# I have no serial port and/or no level shifter #
#################################################   

If you have no serial port and no level shifter, you can use the 3.3 V
serial port of a WiFi router, running OpenWRT or LEDE.  In order to use the
serial port of the router for flashing, you have to disable the serial root
console.  To disable the serial root console of your router, comment out the
line

::askconsole:/bin/ash --login

in /etc/inittab

As long as you have disabled the serial console, don't accidently
misconfigure your router, as you can no longer log into the device via
serial port for debugging ;)

'minicom' or 'picocom' are available as a software packages for OpenWRT/LEDE.

You don't have to install a terminal software, if you know how to set up the serial port
with the 'setserial' utility, that is also available as a software package.

The combination of 'setserial' and 'cat' will save precious space in the
flash of your router ;)
